In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my studies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers as Assistant Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before I could join it, the second Afghan war had broken out. On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and was already deep in the enemy’s country. I followed, however, with many other officers who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my new duties.

The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade, and attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal battle of Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail bullet, which shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I should have fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not been for the devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who threw me across a pack-horse and succeeded in bringing me in safety to the British lines.

Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already improved so far as to be able to ride out on horseback, when I was struck down by enteric fever — the curse of our Indian possessions. For months my life was despaired of, and when at last I came to myself and became convalescent, I was so weak and emaciated that a medical board determined that not a day should be lost in sending me back to England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the troopship “Orontes,” and landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with my health irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal government to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.

I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as air — or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day will permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally gravitated to London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for some time at a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless, meaningless existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably more freely than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances become, that I soon realised that I must either leave the metropolis and rusticate somewhere in the country, or that I must make a complete alteration in my style of living.

Choosing the latter alternative, I began by making up my mind to leave the hotel, and to take up my quarters in some less pretentious and less expensive domicile. On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at the Criterion Bar, when someone tapped me on the shoulder, and turning round, I recognised young Stamford, who had been a dresser under me at Barts.

“Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes—he is cold and unemotional; he would never be a good companion. But if you are happy to put up with his peculiarities, then by all means, let us go and find him. He is working in the chemical laboratory at the hospital.”

We came upon Holmes in the laboratory. He was bending over a retort full of a dark fluid, which he was heating over a lamp. As we entered, he sprang to his feet with a cry of delight.

“I’ve found it! I’ve found it!” he shouted, running towards us with a test tube in his hand. “I have discovered a reagent which is precipitated by hemoglobin, and by nothing else!”

His eyes sparkled, and he seemed quite flushed with excitement as he thrust the test tube before our eyes.

“Why, man,” I exclaimed, “you seem to be as delighted as if you had found something of utmost importance.”

“So I have,” he said. “It is the most practical discovery that has been made in medical jurisprudence for years. Don’t you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains? Come, I must show you this.”

He hurried to the table, and began to demonstrate, showing how even the smallest trace of blood could now be detected. His passion for science was evident, and though his manner might seem eccentric to some, it was impossible not to appreciate the brilliancy of the discovery.

Throughout our conversation, Holmes spoke rapidly, in quick, decisive sentences, as though his thoughts were racing ahead of his words. He asked me many questions about my own background, my injury, and my plans, and I told him everything frankly. He nodded approvingly.

“We must look for rooms,” he said. “I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street, which would suit us very well. You don’t mind the smell of strong tobacco, I hope?”

“I always smoke ‘ship’s’ myself,” I answered.

“That’s good enough. I generally use shag tobacco and I have a habit of keeping chemicals around. Would that annoy you?”

“By no means!”

As we spoke, he led me from the laboratory, down the long hospital corridors, and into the street. We took a hansom to Baker Street, and soon stood before the house which was to become so famous. The landlady showed us up to the rooms—large, airy, comfortable, and reasonably priced.

“It seems a bit too good to be true,” I remarked, looking around.

Holmes laughed. “The only drawback is that I am a very untidy fellow, and I have a maniacal dislike for people touching my things. Otherwise, I think we will get along famously.”

And so it was settled. Within a week, we had moved into 221B Baker Street, and thus began the partnership that would lead to some of the most remarkable adventures ever recorded.

Holmes was a man of extraordinary talent and even stranger habits. He would spend days immersed in chemical experiments, then suddenly emerge to play long, melancholy pieces on the violin. At times he would lie upon the sofa, smoking pipe after pipe, lost in thought; at other moments he would spring to his feet with the energy of a bloodhound on the scent. His knowledge of certain subjects was profound—chemistry, anatomy, botany—while in other matters he was strangely ignorant. But there was no doubt about his powers of observation and deduction. They were unmatched.

I soon found myself fascinated by him, studying his every move, trying to understand how he reached his astonishing conclusions. It was in this way that I grew accustomed to life with Sherlock Holmes, though I had yet to realise just how far-reaching and extraordinary our future would be.
